docs: documentation for initial stable release of `algorand-python-testing` (#8)
algorandfoundation/algorand-python-testing: docs/testing-guide/contract-testing.md

# Smart Contract Testing

This guide provides an overview of how to test smart contracts using the Algorand Python SDK (`algopy`). We will cover the basics of testing `ARC4Contract` and `Contract` classes, focusing on `abimethod` and `baremethod` decorators.

![](https://mermaid.ink/img/pako:eNqVkrFugzAQhl_Fujnp1ImhEiJrJNREWeoOV9sNVsFG9iEVBd69R5w0JE2llsk2n7-7_-AAymsDGewDtpXYrqQT_GyKFwl5vfcBnRZlT5V3IjYYSCjvKKAiCa-JzXfrObyzgTqsxRpVZZ25YOX2nnRrIomCneZzpszLkllktu0f8ratrUKyjFsXCZ1K2gTH7i01_8dGUjOT_55YeLdUFVr3zRunf5b6R5hZoFnBq9cX72_Br_Cj8bl4vJCHaVucvowYxHk5Xg_sfPkY6SbbphDL5dMgQZu29n0U5DMJwzTVGyApySKZKFSNMXKVxPJYYAGNCQ1azX_VYboqgSrTcAcZLzWGDwnSjcxhR37TOwUZhc4sIPhuX0H2jnXkXddqrrCyyKNpTqfjF5m74B8?type=png)

```{note}
The code snippets showcasing the contract testing capabilities are using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/) as the test framework. However, note that the `algorand-python-testing` package can be used with any other test framework that supports Python. `pytest` is used for demonstration purposes in this documentation.
```

## `algopy.ARC4Contract`

> Classes prefixed with `algopy.ARC4Contract` are **required** to be instantiated withing test context. As part of instantiation, the test context will automatically create a matching `algopy.Application` object instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Classes prefixed with `algopy.ARC4Contract` are **required** to be instantiated with an active test context. As part of instantiation, the test context will automatically create a matching `algopy.Application` object instance.
```

        self.votes = GlobalState(UInt64(0), key="votes", description="Total votes cast")
        self.has_voted = LocalState(UInt64(0), key="voted", description="Whether an account has voted")

    @arc4.abimethod(create="require")
    def create(self, initial_topic: UInt64) -> None:
        self.topic.value = initial_topic

    @arc4.abimethod
    def vote(self) -> UInt64:
        assert self.has_voted[Txn.sender] == UInt64(0), "Account has already voted"
        self.votes.value += UInt64(1)
        self.has_voted[Txn.sender] = UInt64(1)
        return self.votes.value

    @arc4.abimethod(readonly=True)
    def get_votes(self) -> UInt64:
        return self.votes.value

    @arc4.abimethod
    def change_topic(self, new_topic: UInt64) -> None:
        assert Txn.sender == Txn.application_id.creator_address(), "Only creator can change topic"
        self.topic.value = new_topic
        self.votes.value = UInt64(0)
        # Reset all votes (this is simplified and not efficient for many users)
        self.has_voted.delete()

...

@pytest.fixture
def context():
    with algopy_testing_context() as ctx:
        yield ctx

>         ctx.reset()

Reviewer: `ctx.reset()` can be removed

def test_simple_voting_contract(context):
    # Arrange
    initial_topic = UInt64(1)
    contract = SimpleVotingContract()

    # Act - Create the contract
    contract.create(initial_topic)

    # Assert - Check initial state
    assert contract.topic.value == initial_topic
    assert contract.votes.value == UInt64(0)

    # Act - Vote
    # note how `algopy.Txn` is temporarily overriden to emulate the transaction content
    # the method `.vote()` is decorated with `algopy.arc4.abimethod`, which means it will assemble a transaction to emulate the AVM application call

>     with context.scoped_txn_fields(sender=context.default_creator):

Reviewer: This snippet looks like it's using the old API, additionally no need for a scope if using the default sender

        result = contract.vote()

    # Assert - you can access the corresponding auto generated application call transaction via test context
    assert len(context.get_transaction_group()) == 1

    # Assert - Note how local and global state are accessed via regular python instance attributes
    assert result == UInt64(1)
    assert contract.votes.value == UInt64(1)
    assert contract.has_voted[context.default_creator] == UInt64(1)

    # Act - Change topic
    new_topic = UInt64(2)
    with context.scoped_txn_fields(sender=context.default_creator):
        contract.change_topic(new_topic)

    # Assert - Check topic changed and votes reset
    assert contract.topic.value == new_topic
    assert contract.votes.value == UInt64(0)
    assert contract.has_voted[context.default_creator] == UInt64(0)

    # Act - Get votes (should be 0 after reset)
    votes = contract.get_votes()

    # Assert - Check votes
    assert votes == UInt64(0)
```

For more examples of tests using `algopy.ARC4Contract`, see the [examples](../examples.md) section.

## `algopy.Contract``

> Classes prefixed with `algopy.Contract` (parent class of `algopy.ARC4Contract`) are **required** to be instantiated withing test context. As part of instantiation, the test context will automatically create a matching `algopy.Application` object instance. This behaviour is identical to `algopy.ARC4Contract` class instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subclasses of `algopy.Contract` are **required** to be instantiated with an active test context. As part of instantiation, the test context will automatically create a matching `algopy.Application` object instance. This behaviour is identical to `algopy.ARC4Contract` class instances.
```

> Unlike `algopy.ARC4Contract`, `algopy.Contract` requires manual setup of the transaction context and explicit method calls. Here's an example demonstrating how to test a `Contract` class:

Reviewer: This can be reworked a bit now, the active_txn_overrides parameter now allows specifying app_args and foreign arrays, so providing a gtxns is only required if multiple transactions are involved

                app_args=[algopy.Bytes(b"increment")],
            ),
        ],
        active_transaction_index=0,
    )

    # Invoke approval program
    result = contract.approval_program()

    # Assert approval program result
    assert result == algopy.UInt64(1)

    # Assert counter value
    assert contract.counter.value == algopy.UInt64(1)

    # Test clear state program
    assert contract.clear_state_program() == algopy.UInt64(1)
```

## Defer contract method invocation

You can create deferred application calls for more complex testing scenarios where order of transactions needs to be controlled:

```python
def test_deferred_call(context):
    contract = MyARC4Contract()

    extra_payment = context.any.txn.payment()
    extra_asset_transfer = context.any.txn.asset_transfer()
    implicit_payment = context.any.txn.payment()
    deferred_call = context.txn.defer_app_call(contract.some_method, implicit_payment)

    with context.txn.create_group([extra_payment, deferred_call, extra_asset_transfer]):
        result = deferred_call.submit()

    print(context.txn.last_group) # [extra_payment, implicit_payment, app call, extra_asset_transfer]
```

> A deferred application call, assembles the application call transaction and can be later executed by calling `.submit()` method on the deferred application call instance. As shown on the example, it can also be passed to the transaction group creation context manager to be executed as part of the transaction group. In such cases if there are more than an application call inside the deferred objects, they will be executed in the order they were added to the transaction group.

Reviewer: This isn't quite correct, only the method passed when calling `defer_app_call` will be executed on `submit()`

# Smart Contract Testing

> > To be defined, mostly rehashing content from

Reviewer: TODO?
